 Google releases three new Gemini models — but no 3.5 Pro | TechCrunch &#8211;:&#8211;:&#8211;:&#8211; 🚨 Flash Sale 🚨 Get $100 off your Disrupt 2026 ticket Get $100 off your Disrupt 2026 ticket: REGISTER NOW. Close TechCrunch Desktop Logo TechCrunch Mobile Logo Latest Startups Venture Apple Security AI Apps Disrupt 2026 Events Podcasts Newsletters Search Submit Site Search Toggle Mega Menu Toggle Topics Latest AI Amazon Apps Biotech &amp; Health Climate Cloud Computing Commerce Crypto Enterprise EVs Fintech Fundraising Gadgets Gaming Google Government &amp; Policy Hardware Instagram Layoffs Media &amp; Entertainment Meta Microsoft Privacy Robotics Security Social Space Startups TikTok Transportation Venture More from TechCrunch Staff Events Startup Battlefield StrictlyVC Newsletters Podcasts Videos Partner Content TechCrunch Brand Studio Crunchboard Contact Us Image Credits: Jagmeet Singh / TechCrunch AI Google releases three new Gemini models — but no 3.5 Pro Rebecca Bellan 10:11 AM PDT · July 21, 2026 On Tuesday, Google DeepMind released Gemini 3.6 Flash,&nbsp;3.5 Flash-Lite, and 3.5 Flash Cyber. Gemini 3.6 Flash is Google’s “workhorse model” that promises improved capabilities in coding, knowledge work, and multimodal performance while reducing token usage by up to 17%, making it cheaper than its predecessor 3.5 Flash.&nbsp; Gemini 3.5 Flash-Lite is the most cost-effective model in the class, and 3.5 Flash Cyber is a specialized model that was fine-tuned for finding and fixing cybersecurity vulnerabilities at a decent price point. This model will be exclusively available to governments and trusted partners as part of a limited access pilot program, according to Google.&nbsp; Google says the focus on these releases is to deliver efficiency, latency, and reliability to customers that are building AI agents at scale.&nbsp; The launch is notable not just for what Google shipped — cheaper, faster models optimized for coding, efficiency, and cybersecurity — but also for what it didn&#8217;t. The update doesn&#8217;t include the long-anticipated update to Google&#8217;s flagship model, Gemini Pro, which was last updated in February. In the time since that launch, OpenAI has released GPT-5.5 and begun rolling out GPT-5.6 , while Anthropic has launched Claude Opus 4.8 and Claude Sonnet 5 and has expanded access to its frontier Fable 5 model , highlighting the intense release pace of the rival labs. Google teased the release of Pro as part of the 3.5 Flash release in May, saying the Pro version was &#8220;already being used internally, and we look forward to rolling it out next month.&#8221; Last week, Bloomberg reported that Google was facing internal delays in launching the 3.5 Pro as it struggled to meet internal performance goals. Gemini Pro models are generally Google&#8217;s highest-capability offerings for complex reasoning and coding tasks, while Flash models prioritize lower cost and faster response times for production applications. Google DeepMind product lead Logan Kilpatrick said Tuesday that the company is currently testing Gemini 3.5 Pro with partners and hopes to &#8220;land soon.&#8221; He also noted that the team has started its most ambitious pre-training run yet for Gemini 4. Topics AI , Enterprise , Google , google gemini When you purchase through links in our articles, we may earn a small commission . This doesn’t affect our editorial independence. Rebecca Bellan Senior Reporter Rebecca Bellan is a senior reporter at TechCrunch where she covers the business, policy, and emerging trends shaping artificial intelligence. Her work has also appeared in Forbes, Bloomberg, The Atlantic, The Daily Beast, and other publications. You can contact or verify outreach from Rebecca by emailing rebecca.bellan@techcrunch.com or via encrypted message at rebeccabellan.491 on Signal. View Bio October 13 &#8211; 15 San Francisco Scale faster. Grow your portfolio. Gain practical expertise. No matter your goal, Disrupt can empower you. Save up to $330 toda y! REGISTER NOW Most Popular Bending Spoons to buy Airtable for $1.28B Ivan Mehta Influencers draw backlash for attending OpenAI&#8217;s first luxury trip Dominic-Madori Davis Sequoia&#8217;s Shaun Maguire leads $1B round for nuclear startup Valar Atomics Julie Bort Malaysia is reportedly shutting down Balaji Srinivasan’s Network School Anthony Ha YouTuber Hank Green says his AI usage is ‘not healthy’ Anthony Ha WhatsApp is testing a new folder for messages from large businesses Ivan Mehta Okta buys AI security startup Permiso — source says for about $200M Jagmeet Singh Loading the next article Error loading the next article X LinkedIn Facebook Instagram youTube Mastodon Threads Bluesky TechCrunch Staff Contact Us Advertise Crunchboard Jobs Site Map Terms of Service Privacy Policy RSS Terms of Use Code of Conduct OpenAI vs Apple Nous Research Space Data Centers Staya Nadella SpaceX Starship Tech Layoffs ChatGPT © 2026 TechCrunch Media LLC. 