 The 2025 DORA Report | Thoughtworks United States Enable javascript in your browser for better experience. Need to know to enable it? Go here. Menu Close United States | English Australia English Brazil English | Português Canada English Chile English | Español China English | Chinese Ecuador English | Español Germany English | Deutsch India English Singapore English Spain English | Español Thailand English United Kingdom English United States English Worldwide English Search Close Ask Tai United States | English Australia English Brazil English | Português Canada English Chile English | Español China English | Chinese Ecuador English | Español Germany English | Deutsch India English Singapore English Spain English | Español Thailand English United Kingdom English United States English Worldwide English What we do Go to overview AI/works™ Who we work with Go to overview Industries Automotive Public Sector Energy Media and Publishing Retail and E-commerce Financial Services Not-for-profit Travel and Transport Scaleups Utilities Manufacturing and Engineering Life Sciences and Medtech Insights Go to overview Publications and Tools Technology Radar An opinionated guide to today&#39;s technology landscape Perspectives A no-nonsense publication for digital leaders Decoder The business execs&#39; A-Z guide to technology Looking Glass Bringing the tech-led business changes into focus All Insights Articles In-depth insights to help your business grow Blogs Expert advice on design, engineering, AI and careers Books Explore our extensive library to keep learning Podcasts Conversations on the latest in business and tech Engineering Careers Go to overview Application Process What to expect as you interview with us Graduates and Career Changers Thoughtworks University: Preparing future leaders Search Jobs Find open positions in your region Stay Connected Sign up for our monthly newsletter Learning and Development Explore how we support career growth Benefits See how we take care of our people About Go to overview Contact Search Close Ask Tai The 2025 DORA Report State of AI-assisted software development Reports Back Reports Back Close Generative AI Engineering effectiveness Report The 2025 DORA Report AI is rapidly reshaping what’s possible in software engineering. Organizations are harnessing AI to accelerate delivery cycles, unlock new levels of productivity and empower teams to focus on high-value innovation. The 2025 DORA report captures this momentum. Companies adopting AI are realizing gains in individual effectiveness, throughput, quality and overall performance. The findings reinforce a simple truth: organisations that see real returns from AI start by rebuilding the systems, platforms and workflows AI depends on. Register for your copy &#34;The real value of an engineer is no longer just in writing code. It&#39;s in prompt engineering, solution architecture and validating AI-generated outputs. When an organization’s structure and processes don’t support this shift, AI simply becomes a faster way to create chaos. This is why Thoughtworks focuses on rebuilding the core of software delivery before scaling AI across teams and products.&#39;&#39; Chris Westerhold , Thoughtworks’ Global Practice Director of Engineering Excellence Key insights AI is an amplifier, not a fix AI amplifies existing strengths and weaknesses. The strongest results come from rebuilding core systems and platforms so AI can operate safely, effectively and at scale. Platform engineering is the AI foundation Quality internal platforms are the essential foundation for AI success, significantly boosting organizational performance. Systemic practices unlock AI value Successful AI adoption demands fixing the system, with user-centric focus critical to amplify the benefits of AI — and prevent a negative impact on team performance. Speed increases, but instability persists AI adoption is universal, boosting individual effectiveness and delivery speed. However, it still correlates with higher instability, proving that systems must adapt. Turning insight into action The 2025 DORA Report shows that AI success depends less on individual tools and more on the systems, platforms and workflows they operate within. At Thoughtworks, we describe this as AI that works: rebuilding core platforms, rewiring workflows for agents and reimagining how teams deliver value, so AI can create sustained value, not just short-term acceleration. Watch our recent on-demand event for a deep dive into the report&#39;s findings Infographic: The 2025 DORA Report Download here Article An engineering leadership perspective Chris Westerhold points out that while individual productivity soars, AI also exposes instability in weak systems. Sustainable success requires treating AI as an organizational transformation. He argues the solution is building a strong engineering foundation centered on platform engineering and prioritizing developer experience. Read this article Recommended insights Webinar Software engineering: Metrics that matter Watch now Webinar Beyond DORA: Metrics, AI and the future of platform engineering Watch now Podcast Measuring what matters in the age of AI Listen now Webinar How platforms are foundational to AI: Platform engineering exec roundtable Watch now Article The future of software development: AI speed, human judgment Read this article View more View less Download your copy of the 2025 DORA Report * Required fields Marketo Form ID is invalid !!! Thanks! You can now download The 2025 DORA Report in full. Company About us What we do Partnerships Who we work with News Diversity, Equity and Inclusion Careers Contact us Insights Preference center Articles Blogs Books Podcasts Site info Privacy policy Accessibility statement Modern slavery statement Code of conduct Integrity helpline Sustainable procurement policy Speak up policy Anti-bribery and anti-corruption policy Fraud advisory note Connect with us © 2026 Thoughtworks, Inc. × WeChat 