Claude Opus 5 gets near-Fable 5 performance for 'half the price' Skip to main content Toggle main menu 9to5Google Logo Go to the 9to5Google home page Switch site 9to5Mac Logo 9to5Mac 9to5Toys Electrek Drone DJ Logo DroneDJ Space Explored About Privacy Toggle social menu Toggle dark mode Search for: Submit Toggle search form Forums Exclusives Gemini Pixel Google Pixel 9 Pro Fold Google Pixel 9 Pro XL Google Pixel 9 Pro Google Pixel 9 Pixel 8 Pro Pixel 8 Google Pixel Watch 3 Pixel Watch Google Pixel Buds Pro 2 Pixel Buds Pro Nest Nest Hub Nest Hub Max Nest Mini Nest Audio Nest Thermostats Nest Cam Nest Doorbell Android Android 17 Auto Wear OS Samsung OnePlus Oppo Xiaomi Chrome Google Chrome ChromeOS TV Google TV Android TV Chromecast Chromecast with Google TV Workspace Gmail Google Meet Google Chat Google Calendar Google Keep Google Drive Google Docs YouTube YouTube YouTube Music YouTube TV Reviews Newsletters Videos Toggle dark mode Claude Claude Opus 5 launches with similar performance as Fable 5 for ‘half the price’ Andrew Romero  | Jul 24 2026 - 11:34 am PT 0 Comments Anthropic says its Claude Opus 5 AI model is an improvement that takes less effort to deliver similar results as the nearly-banned Fable 5. Claude Opus 5 is available now as the next version of what used to be Anthropic’s highest performer. When Fable 5 was released , recalled, then released again , it sat above Opus 4.8 in terms of pure performance. The margins have shifted slightly. Claude Opus 5 reportedly costs half the price of Fable 5, yet it delivers results that are similar in performance. Benchmarks released by Anthropic detail the disparity. It looks like Fable 5 is slightly better in a few areas, but the difference is narrow. In areas like business workflows, computer use, and agentic research, Claude Opus 5 performs better. On several coding and knowledge work evaluations, Opus 5 is the new state-of-the-art: pic.twitter.com/Cl3fDxM0gP — Claude (@claudeai) July 24, 2026 Fable 5 is famously a token-monster, too. Anthropic says it improved the Opus model, all while keeping the costs similar to what users were used to with Opus 4.8. Anthropic also notes that even when Opus 5 runs at minimal effort, it still succeeds in more tasks than other models at high effort when working through business workflows. Advertisement - scroll for more content Fable 5 is currently available to users, but it carries heavier restrictions. The new Opus 5 release, though, is expected to intervene around 85% less often. Fable 5 is still king in terms of highly advanced tasks in cybersecurity exploitation and biology, but Opus 5 is expected to present a much more capable model to the broader user base. Opus 5 is available on all platforms starting today. FTC: We use income earning auto affiliate links. More. You’re reading 9to5Google — experts who break news about Google and its surrounding ecosystem, day after day. Be sure to check out our homepage for all the latest news, and follow 9to5Google on Twitter , Facebook , and LinkedIn to stay in the loop. Don’t know where to start? Check out our exclusive stories , reviews , how-tos , and subscribe to our YouTube channel Featured from 9to5Google 9to5Google Logo Review: The Galaxy Z Fold 8’s new shape isn’t for you – it’s for everyone Ben Schoon Jul 31 2026 Review: The Galaxy Z Fold 8 Ultra ticks every box, but it’s the boring option now Andrew Romero Jul 31 2026 Stadia was some of the most fun I’ve had gaming, but it was right to disappear Damien Wilde Jul 31 2026 Google’s Pixel 11 Glow might be called ‘HiLight’ Abner Li Jul 31 2026 Podcast Check out 9to5Google on YouTube for more news: Comments Expand Close comments Expand Close comments Guides Claude Author Andrew Romero chaosromero Andrew Romero's favorite gear Samsung Galaxy S25 Ultra Galaxy Watch Ultra