Overreliance on AI programs may undermine confidence at work, study finds Topics Week's top Latest news Unread news Subscribe Jobs Science X Account Sign In Sign in with Forget Password? Not a member? Sign up Learn more Automotive Business Computer Sciences Consumer & Gadgets Electronics & Semiconductors Energy & Green Tech Engineering Hardware Hi Tech & Innovation Internet Machine learning & AI Other Robotics Security Software Telecom share this! Share Tweet Share Email Home Machine learning & AI April 16, 2026 Overreliance on AI programs may undermine confidence at work, study finds by American Psychological Association edited by Sadie Harley , reviewed by Andrew Zinin Sadie Harley Scientific Editor Meet our editorial team Behind our editorial process Andrew Zinin Lead Editor Meet our editorial team Behind our editorial process Editors' notes This article has been reviewed according to Science X's editorial process and policies . Editors have highlighted the following attributes while ensuring the content's credibility: fact-checked trusted source proofread The GIST Add as preferred source Credit: Pixabay/CC0 Public Domain Relying on AI to complete work duties may not be diminishing our cognitive abilities, but it can undermine confidence in our own independent reasoning and perceived ownership of ideas, according to research published in Technology, Mind, and Behavior . The study included 1,923 online adult participants from the United States and Canada who were told to use commercially available AI programs to complete 10 simulated work tasks, such as developing plans with incomplete or evolving information, interpreting ambiguous data, and articulating reasoning for strategic decisions. After the tasks, 58% of the participants agreed that AI "did most of the thinking" to complete the work, especially in activities related to planning or sequencing. Those participants also reported reduced confidence in their own independent reasoning, lesser perceived ownership of ideas, and making trade-offs between task speed and depth of thought. Men reported higher levels of AI reliance than women. However, participants who actively modified , challenged, or rejected AI suggestions reported greater confidence and a stronger sense of authorship, said study author Sarah Baldeo, MBA, a Ph.D. candidate in AI and neuroscience at Middlesex University in England. "The issue was not AI use itself but the degree of passive acceptance," she said. "Participants who used AI but still maintained oversight and active judgment tended to feel more confident in their own reasoning." The study findings are correlational, so can't prove causation. AI programs should be developed to prompt users to not rely too heavily on AI content, think of their own alternatives, and review assumptions, the journal article stated. "Broadly, the best way to use AI is to train it rather than letting it train you," Baldeo said. "Program it to function for specific uses, and stop anthropomorphizing AI." Baldeo offered some other tips: Try solving a problem yourself before asking AI programs to do the work for you. Refine AI prompts at least two or three times to receive a more high-quality response that also engages your own cognitive abilities. Take at least two or three days off each week from using AI programs at work to avoid the risk of " intellectual leveling " where people start to linguistically sound like AI from overuse. "The potential long-term risks aren't that AI makes people less intelligent but that some users may become less engaged in the deeper cognitive work that produces novel thinking," Baldeo said. "That is why the distinction between AI assistance and overreliance is so important." More information Generative Artificial Intelligence Reliance and Executive Function Attenuation: Behavioral Evidence of Cognitive Offload in High-Use Adults, Technology Mind and Behavior (2026). DOI: 10.1037/tmb0000191 Key concepts Generative AI ethics Artificial intelligence labor economics Provided by American Psychological Association Who's behind this story? Sadie Harley BSc Life Sciences & Ecology. Microbiology lab background with pharmaceutical news experience in oil, gas, and renewable industries. Full profile → Andrew Zinin Master's in physics with research experience. Long-time science news enthusiast. Plays key role in Science X's editorial success. Full profile → Citation : Overreliance on AI programs may undermine confidence at work, study finds (2026, April 16) retrieved 5 August 2026 from https://techxplore.com/news/2026-04-overreliance-ai-undermine-confidence.html This document is subject to copyright. Apart from any fair dealing for the purpose of private study or research, no part may be reproduced without the written permission. The content is provided for information purposes only. Explore further Some people gain confidence from thinking things through, others lose it 9  shares Facebook Twitter Email Feedback to editors Trending Featured Last Comments Prototype glasses can turn infrared into color vision Aug 3, 2026 0 Noninvasive AI-based system translates brain signals into written text Aug 3, 2026 0 Existing power grids draw data centers to cities, study finds Aug 2, 2026 0 People prefer stories written by AI—especially when told they're written by a human 15 hours ago 0 Adaptive decision support can fight overreliance on AI Aug 3, 2026 0 Human-aware robots adapt to partners, reducing back strain during team lifting 3 hours ago People prefer stories written by AI—especially when told they're written by a human 15 hours ago Solving the solvent problem to make sodium-metal batteries a more practical energy storage option 18 hours ago Self-repairing, recyclable substrate developed for durable soft sensors 19 hours ago Composite catalyst could improve oxygen reactions in next-generation lithium-oxygen batteries 19 hours ago Polar molecules and polymer bridges overcome two key limits in organic electronics 20 hours ago Innovative design unlocks resilient semiconductor materials 20 hours ago Selective microwave heating speeds bamboo-to-hydrogen fuel conversion 22 hours ago Solar-charged rock bed powers coffee roaster with heat stored for days 23 hours ago ZiaCore microreactor successfully achieves criticality Aug 4, 2026 Related Stories Some people gain confidence from thinking things through, others lose it Feb 1, 2026 AI is homogenizing human expression and thought, computer scientists and psychologists say Mar 11, 2026 Cognitive speed training linked to lower dementia incidence up to 20 years later Feb 28, 2026 Is AI making us stupider? Maybe, according to one of the world's biggest AI companies Feb 16, 2025 AI use makes us overestimate our cognitive performance, study reveals Oct 28, 2025 Two types of underconfidence linked to anxiety and gender Jan 15, 2026 Recommended for you Human-aware robots adapt to partners, reducing back strain during team lifting 3 hours ago People prefer stories written by AI—especially when told they're written by a human 15 hours ago Solving the solvent problem to make sodium-metal batteries a more practical energy storage option 18 hours ago Polar molecules and polymer bridges overcome two key limits in organic electronics 20 hours ago Innovative design unlocks resilient semiconductor materials 20 hours ago Selective microwave heating speeds bamboo-to-hydrogen fuel conversion 22 hours ago Load comments (0) Get Instant Summarized Text (Gist) Overreliance on AI for work tasks is associated with reduced confidence in independent reasoning and diminished perceived ownership of ideas, particularly when users passively accept AI suggestions. Active engagement, such as modifying or challenging AI outputs, correlates with greater confidence and authorship. The findings are correlational and do not establish causation. This summary was automatically generated using LLM. Full disclaimer Let us know if there is a problem with our content Use this form if you have come across a typo, inaccuracy or would like to send an edit request for the content on this page. For general inquiries, please use our contact form . For general feedback, use the public comments section below (please adhere to guidelines ). Please select the most appropriate category to facilitate processing of your request -- please select one -- Compliments / Critique Typos / Errors / Inaccuracies Edit / Removal request Your message to the editors Your email (optional, only if you'd like a response) Send Feedback Thank you for taking time to provide your feedback to the editors. Your feedback is important to us. However, we do not guarantee individual replies due to the high volume of messages. E-mail the story Overreliance on AI programs may undermine confidence at work, study finds Your friend's email Your email I would like to subscribe to Science X Newsletter. Learn more Your name Note Your email address is used only to let the recipient know who sent the email. Neither your address nor the recipient's address will be used for any other purpose. The information you enter will appear in your e-mail message and is not retained by Tech Xplore in any form. Your message Send Phys.org Daily science news on research developments and the latest scientific innovations Medical Xpress Medical research advances and health news Science X The most comprehensive sci-tech news coverage on the web Newsletters Subscribe Science X Daily and the Weekly Email Newsletter are free features that allow you to receive your favorite sci-tech news updates in your email inbox Follow us Top Home Search Mobile version Help FAQ About Contact Support us Science X Account Newsletter Archive Android app iOS app Jobs Push notification © Tech Xplore 2014 - 2026 powered by Science X Network Privacy policy Terms of use Your Privacy This site uses cookies to assist with navigation, analyse your use of our services, collect data for ads personalisation and provide content from third parties. By using our site, you acknowledge that you have read and understand our Privacy Policy and Terms of Use . I'm OK with that Cookie options E-mail newsletter Subscribe Follow us It appears that you are currently using Ad Blocking software . What are the consequences? ×